# Developer journal, 11 January 2020

Planned: C refresher.

Book: "Modern C"

## Oh Christmas C, oh Christmas C, your branches green delight us

Unconditional transfer of control:

- function invocation
- `exit`, `quick_exit`, `abort` (what's the difference?)
- `goto` (considered harmful - yet necessary for breaking out of multiple nested loops)
- `setjmp`, `longjmp` (to return unconditionally to a calling context; ok that's new to me)
- function `raise` (raises signals that get passed to a signal handler. now i know why there's zombie processes in linux)

### Functions

`void`

- declare `return_type func_name(void);` if no arguments
- declare `void func_name(...);` if no return

Function prototype: a compiler has to know what the expected argument types are, and what the return type is.
Therefore this is valid: `extern bool leapyear(unsigned);` 

`stdargs.h` provides a mechanism for variable argument list - but "the feature is to be avoided".

> Make all preconditions for a function explicit.

which means call `assert()` (from `assert.h`) if argument types are insufficient to express function requirements.
`assert` macro can be disabled in prod build. (HOW?)

TIP: ensure the preconditions of a recursive function in a wrapper function. This avoids having to check the
precondition at each recursive call. (But do you actually want to do recursion in C?)

#### `main` function

Has several prototypes:

- `int main(void);` (always possible)
- `int main(int argc, char* argv[argc+1]);` (always possible)
    - `argv[0]` is the name of the program incl. path if any)
    - `argv[argc]` is 0
- sometimes the return type may be void (on embedded)
- sometimes a third parameter can give access to the "environment"

Two return values: `EXIT_SUCCESS` and `EXIT_FAILURE` (but what about error codes?)

`exit` is equivalent to returning from main, but from anywhere in the code

### Weird stuff to check

`memset` fills out the array with `char` values, so if you have an array of larger values,
you should use sizeof, as in: `memset(nums, true, len*sizeof(unsigned));`
