# Developer Journal, 30 January 2020 - 01 February 2020

Planned: take a closer look at ocaml ... get annoyed ... Haskell refresher

## Haskell refresher, notes

### Modules

`import modulename`

### Operators, basic predicates and operator-like functions

- `[]` nil
- `:` cons
- `++` concatenate lists
- `null` nilp / nil?
- `head` car
- `tail` cdr 
- `fst` tuple[0]
- `snd` tuple[1]

- `&&` `||` operators; `and` `or` functions

- destructuring
    - `(head:tail)` as the names indicate
    - `all@( ..)` now `all` contains the entire structure
    - `_` means "ignore this field", eg. `(Person firstName _)`

- to use a function as infix rather than prefix, you must surround it
in backticks

### Types

`:t` get type of something

Function signature: `name :: type restrictions => type -> type -> ...`

`[type]` - list of type

Define a new type: `type SomeType = ...expression of types...`

### Data types

`data DataType = Alternative1 Type1 Type2 | Alternative2 ... deriving (TypeProp, TypeProp, ...)`
where type properties might be `Eq`, `Ord`, `Show`...

`data DataType = DataType { fieldName1 :: Type1 , ... } deriving (...)`
and then field names can be used as:
 
- named constructor arguments, eg ` { field1 = Constr1 { field2 = "Something" } }`
- accessors eg `field1 object`
- pattern matching, eg `helloWorld Alternative1 { field1 = f}`

_However_, because of the functions, field names must be unique
(allowable: sharing the same field name in multiple alternatives of
the data type if the fields have the same type) 

GHC extensions:

- `NamedFieldPuns` where you don't need to re-label the field
- `RecordWildCards` where you use `{..}` to create bindings for all variables

### Constants

`constantName = Constructor arg1 ...`

Good pattern for default set of values overwritten with custom settings:

```haskell

data SomeDataType = { field1 :: Integer, field2 :: String }

defaultSomeData = SomeDataType 0 "abc"

functionUsingSomeData defaultSomeData { field1 = 1 } -- HERE!!
```

### Functions

Declaration

`functionName :: TypeProp wildcard => Arg1Type typeToken -> Arg2Type -> ... -> ReturnType`
where argument type might be either `StorageType`, or normal type (?), and including
one or more type wildcards is optional.

Definition

Many lines of:
`functionName arg1 arg2 ... | guardExpr = expr` where arguments can contain
destructuring and `guard` can be a predicate or `otherwise` (which is redundant
and only for readability)

View patterns

Extension available in GHC. Works like a guard expression, except applies
a function on the argument and checks if the result is correct.

Eg.
```haskell
specialClient (clientName -> "Mr. Alejandro") = True
specialClient _ = False
```

### Control structures

- `if` predicate `then` expr `else` expr
- `let` binding (with destructuring) per line `in` expr
- expr `where` binding (with destructuring) per line
- `case` var `of` value (with destructuring) per line `->` expr

### Project management

- `cabal init` - equivalent of composer etc
- you have to move files to `src` manually, and set `hs-source-dirs` accordingly
- directories = packages
- namespace separator: `.`

### Haskell is indentation sensitive, yay

> Haskell uses a different solution, called layout. In a layout-based syntax
> how a line is indented isn’t as important as the fact that all elements in
> the same block start in the same column.
> In an if block, the lines for then and else must be indented the same way.
> In a let or a where block, all local bindings must start in the same position.

> Functions, parameters and bindings must start with a lowercase letter.
> in case of an operator name, it must not start with :

> types, constructors, type classes and kinds must start with an uppercase letter.
> if using an operator name, it must start with :

### GHC pragma

GHC extensions. Example:

`{-# LANGUAGE ViewPatterns #-}`