# Developer journal, 23 January 2020

Planned: Modern C, read and set down notes for part 3

## Modern C, cont'd

### 18 (threads)

- `thrd_create`: start new thread
- `thrd_join`: await termination of thread
- `thrd_start_t`: type of function which is executed at the start of a thread
- `thrd_exit`
- `thrd_detach`: let system know a (child) thread will never be joined; do not
    keep resources reserved after the thread dies
- `thrd_current`: "this" thread ID
- `thrd_equal`: compare two thread IDs, return non-zero if equal
- `thrd_sleep`: suspend execution for some time (when not waiting on a mutex)
- `thrd_yield`: suspend execution, restart when scheduled next

Returning from `main` or calling `exit` _terminates all threads_. To terminate
`main` while allowing all other threads to go on, call `thrd_exit`.
(You then also need to make thread state a global variable, because it shouldn't
go away when `main` ends, and install an `atexit` handler to clean up
the global variable.)

#### Sharing memory between threads

Thread memory sharing in C: "provide the same void pointer to all threads"
    and that's where you store state. _hyperventillating_

Use `_Atomic` keyword to indicate state-representing-struct members that should
have guaranteed atomic (indivisible) access. The keyword can be used in two
ways, but `_Atomic()` is preferable:

```c
// an atomic pointer to an array of 45 double elements
extern _Atomic(double (*)[45]) A;
extern double (*_Atomic A)[45];
// a pointer to an array of 45 atomic double elements
extern _Atomic(double) (*B)[45];
extern double _Atomic (*B)[45];
```

Note that _Atomic cannot be applied to array types.

_shoutout to linearizability section, but I'm not gonna read it now_

- `call_once` to initialise objects in a thread if there was absolutely no
    option to do that at an earlier (less ambiguous) time
- p. 267 destruction of shared objects, not easy, easiest to do `atexit`
- `_Thread_local` storage class and macro `thread_local` from `threads.h`
    if initialisation can be determined at compile time
- `tss_t` thread specific storage, if needs to be allocated and initialised
    dynamically (`tss_get`, `tss_set`, `tss_create`, `tss_delete`)

#### Mutexes

`mtx_t` - protecting critical sections

- type: `mtx_plain`, `mtx_timed` (timed lock),
    `mtx_plain|mtx_recursive`, `mtx_timed|mtx_recursive`
    (recursive: allows acquiring the same lock multiple times)
- **mandatory**: `mtx_init` and `mtx_destroy`
- acquire lock, blocking (wait forever until available) `mtx_lock`
- release lock `mtx_unlock`
- attempt lock, fail immediately if unavailable `mtx_trylock`
- attempt lock, wait until available with timeout `mtx_timedlock`

#### Condition variables

`cnd_t` -  used to identify a condition for which a thread might want to wait.
They model kinds of dependencies between threads.

- **mandatory**: `cnd_init`, `cnd_destroy`
- wait for a condition variable: `cnd_wait`, `cnd_timedwait`
- wake thread(s) waiting for the variable: one thread `cnd_signal`,
    all threads `cnd_broadcast`

There can be many condition variables for the same mutex.

Condition variable serves as a sort of identification of the condition,
for several sections accessing the same mutex.

On return from a `cnd_t` wait, the expression must be checked again.

> The mutex must be held by the calling thread to the wait function. It is
> temporarily released during the wait, so other threads can do their job
> to assert the condition expression. The lock is reacquired just before
> returning from the wait call so then the critical data can safely be accessed
> without races.

### 19. Atomic access, memory consistency

read-modify-write operations:

- Calls to `atomic_exchange` and `atomic_compare_exchange_weak` for any
    `_Atomic` objects
- Compound assignments or their functional equivalents; increment and decrement
    operators for any `_Atomic` objects of arithmetic type
- Calls to `atomic_flag_test_and_set` for `atomic_flag`

I need to read when I have more coffee and less of a headache.

### Challenges

- Challenge 18: create a parallel version of merge sort
