# Developer journal, 14 January 2020

Planned: C refresher - solve a challenge.

Book: "Modern C"

## Environment setup

Ran a Twitter poll to check how many people have used flashcards to learn
programming languages. In about 1.5 days, there have been 50 responses
with a 0.18/0.7 spread of yes/no.

Created a blog article Beeminder goal, starting with 1 article per month.

How to create a Beeminder goal for blog posts:

- Create a new goal on Beeminder ("do more of")
- Go to https://ifttt.com/create/
- IF action: rss (paste RSS url of your blog)
- THEN action: Beeminder - select the name of your goal

## Debugging, oy

`lldb` is a Python script, runs only with Python 2.7 or something.
Meanwhile, something (homebrew?) seems to have performed some cleanups,
and lldb can no longer find a library it needs.

Sometimes it attempts to run itself with python3, sometimes with python2.

Here is how to fix it: `PATH=/usr/bin /usr/bin/lldb`

Then once it runs:

- `target create "output.out"`
- `run`
- `p list[3]` - how to access pointer contents
    - `p ((int*)void_pointer_i_know_is_int)[0]` - can cast if it's a `void*`

To turn on (address sanitizer)[https://clang.llvm.org/docs/AddressSanitizer.html],
add `-fsanitize=address` flag when compiling with `clang`.

## Actually using C

Void pointers are great, except when you need to do pointer arithmetic.
Luckily (?) everything in C is actually an unsigned char pointer underneath,
and `sizeof(unsigned char) == 1` so we can cast them and use result of
`sizeof(original_type)` to do the right thing. Maybe.
 