# Developer Journal, 16 February 2020

## Beginning Haskell, cont'd

### Monads, useful functions

    This may be out fo date:
    
    You should ensure that you have an instance of `Functor` for each of your
    `Monad` instances. Build it using `liftM` from `Control.Monad` - it is
    basically `fmap` for monads if `fmap f g = g >>= (\x -> return $ f x)`

You can mix `do` notation and `let` _without `in`_:

```haskell
do number1 <- obtainNumber1
   number2 <- obtainNumber2
   let sum = number1 + number2
   return $ sqrt sum
```

`mtl` package, useful functions of `Control.Monad.State`:

- `get` - returns state
- `gets` - returns specific field of state using an accessor (projection function)
- `put` - replaces state
- `modify` - maps old state to new state

Push the "go" button on a state monad:

- `runState :: State s a -> s -> (a,s)` - get value and transformed state
- `evalState :: State s a -> s -> a` - get the final value
- `execState :: State s a -> s -> s` - get the final transformed state

Monad laws, reframed:

- `do { x <- return a; f x} == do { f a }`
- `do { y <- m; return y }  == do { m }`
- third is a block

```haskell
do x <- m
   do y <- f x
     g y

-- is equivalent to

do y <- do x <- m
           f x
   g y

-- is equivalent to

do x <- m
   y <- f x
   g y
```

### Lens utilities for use inside State monad

- first `use` rather than `gets`
- update value "in place"
    - `.=` assign new value
    - `+=` increase number by
    - etc
- `zoom` takes a lense, makes lens contents part of state

```haskell
zoomExample :: State ExampleState ()
zoomExample = do n <- use increment
                 zoom (clients.traversed) $ do
                   identifier += n
                   person.fullName %= map toUpper
```

### Reader monad: read-only state

For functions that consume state, but don't modify it.

Typical usecase: settings of an application (config).

```haskell
instance Monad ((->) r) where
  return :: a -> (r -> a)
  return x = \r -> x

  (>>=) :: (r -> a) -> (a -> r -> b) -> (r -> b)
  f >>= g = \r -> g (f r) r
```

- `ask` - complete context
- `asks` - like `gets`, applies an accessor fn
- `local` - modify state temporarily, execute inner block with modified state
- `runReader` - to make the monad go

### Writer monad: write-only state

For functions that generate state, but don't examine it.

Typical usecase: a logging library.

You must provide a Monoid to specify how a newly added value is combined
with the previous state.

- `tell` - add new value to Writer
- `runWriter` - make Writer go, whoosh!

```haskell
accessDatabase :: Writer String ()
accessDatabase = do tell "Start database access"
                    info <- readInformation computeValue info
                    tell "Finish database access"
```

Exercise 6.6 - define a writer monad. Unfortunately, the class hierarchy
seems to have changed since the book was written. Can't find the source
code for the change, old tutorials would have you write stuff as in the book.

### ST Monad

`Control.Monad.ST` (requires `RankNTypes` ghc extension) - create mutable
variables of `Data.STRef` type. Not considered a very good practice.

- `newSTRef`
- `readSTRef`
- `writeSTRef`
- `modifySTRef` (lazy, not recommended) or `modifySTRef'` (strict)
