# Developer journal, 12 January 2020

Planned: C refresher.

Book: "Modern C"

## I C dead people

### A list of headers and their contents

Header | Content
--- | ---
<assert.h> | Asserting runtime conditions
<complex.h> | Complex numbers
<ctype.h> | Character classification and conversion
<errno.h> | Error codes
<fenv.h> | Floating-point environment
<float.h> | Properties of floating-point types
<inttypes.h> | Formatting conversion of integer types
<iso646.h> | Alternative spellings for operators
<limits.h> | Properties of integer types
<locale.h> | Internationalization
<math.h> | Type-specific mathematical functions
<setjmp.h> | Non-local jumps
<signal.h> | Signal-handling functions
<stdalign.h> | Alignment of objects
<stdarg.h> | Functions with varying numbers of arguments
<stdatomic.h> | Atomic operations
<stdbool.h> | Booleans
<stddef.h> | Basic types and macros
<stdint.h> | Exact-width integer types
<stdio.h> | Input and output
<stdlib.h> | Basic functions
<stdnoreturn.h> | Non-returning functions
<string.h> | String handling
<tgmath.h> | Type-generic mathematical functions
<threads.h> | Threads and control structures
<time.h> | Handling time
<uchar.h> | Unicode characters
<wchar.h> | Wide strings
<wctype.h> | Wide character classification and conversion

What can library functions return to indicate an error? Depends on what their normal functionality is.

- 0
- a predefined error code (like EOF)
- a nonzero value
- anything that is not a success code
- a negative value

`errno`: a state variable that tracks errors of library functions.
**If you recover from failure, you need to reset this variable.**

### Bounds-checking

Protection against buffer overflow. Deprecates or removes some functions, provides substitutions
that check consistency of arguments at runtime. Optional, debated, and not supported everywhere.

These functions have a `_s` suffix, **therefore treat `_s` suffix as reserved.**

```c
#if !__STDC_LIB_EXT1__
# error "This code needs bounds checking interface Annex K" #endif
#define __STDC_WANT_LIB_EXT1__ 1
#include <stdio.h>
/* Use printf_s from here on. */
```

### Preprocessor directives

- `#include <someheader.h>`
- `#if some_condition\n ... \n#elif other_condition\n ... \n#else\n ... \n#endif` (separate lines)
    - `#ifdef` or `#ifndef`
- `#error "Some error message""`
- `#warning "Some warning message""`
- `#define MACRO substitution` (macros are more complicated, they can have arguments, I'm not gonna study that)
    - `#undef SOME_ALIAS_OR_MACRO`

#### Useful macros (from the internet)

- `__FILE__` => The name of the current file, as a string literal
- `__LINE__` => Current line of the source file, as a numeric literal
- `__DATE__` => Current system date, as a string
- `__TIME__` => Current system time, as a string
- `__TIMESTAMP__` => Date and time (non-standard)
- `__cplusplus` => undefined when your C code is being compiled by a C compiler; 199711L when your C code is being compiled by a C++ compiler compliant with 1998 C++ standard.
- `__func__` => Current function name of the source file, as a string (part of C99)
- `__PRETTY_FUNCTION__` => "decorated" Current function name of the source file, as a string (in GCC; non-standard)

### Mathematical functions

What you would expect. abs, floor, ceil, quot/rem, logs, sin/cos/tg etc.
Here are some I wouldn't have thought existed: `copysign`, `fdim`, `nearbyint`, and also `nan`, `isnan`, `isinf`

### I/O functions

`FILE` represents a stream. Actually, `FILE` is a macro. It's a "historical interface" (aka we wish we'd done
this differently) for an "opaque type" of which we only know it's serviced by the above file. 

Default streams available: `stdout`, `stderr`, `stdout`

- Implicit stdout: putchar, puts (appends EOL, auto-flushes), printf (printf_s)
- Implicit stderr: perror (appends EOL, auto-flushes)
- Implicit stdin: getchar (gets_s) 
- Stream: fputc, fputs (does not append EOL, does not flush), fopen, freopen (fopen_s, freopen_s), fclose, fflush,
fprintf (fprintf_s), fgetc, fgets, feof
- Filesystem: remove, rename

`fopen` modes: a, w, r, modifiers: +, b, x

**End of file can only be detected after a failed read.**

`printf` specifiers, a selection of: `d` (signed int), `u` (unsigned int), `c` (character),
`s` (string), `g` (floating point), `x` (unsigned int, in hexadecimal).

Special examples: `%.2f` a floating point with precision of 2, `%%` a % sign, `%0d` zero-padding.

**Recipe for numbers that will be later read from file**: `%+d` (signed), `%#X` (unsigned), `%a` (float)

### String functions

`string.h`: Various string search functions: strspn, strcspn, memchr, strchr, strpbrk, strrchr, strstr, and strtok

`ctype.h` contains functions which you'd associate with a regexp, such as `isalpha`, `islower`, `isdigit`,
`isgraph`, `isprint`, `ispunct`, and `toupper`, `tolower`. Unfortunately native English-speakers wrote this,
so the default charset is limited to characters which were useful to native English-speakers.
C implementations _may_ extend some of the relevant classes with letters everyone else needs, but don't count on it.

There exist conversions from string to every numeric type (`strtod`, `strtoul` and so on.)

**Recipe**: `strtoul(S, 0, 0)`

### Time

`time`, `difftime`, `mktime`, `strftime`, `timespec_get` (`asctime_s`, `ctime_s`, `gmtime_s`, `localtime_s`)

As you would expect. Some use `struct tm`, the fields of which require "special" treatment in the following ways:

- **`tm_year` must add 1900 to get the year**
- `tm_mday` starts counting days in the month at 1 (and why not? but presumably everything else starts at 0)
- `tm_sec` is in the range from 0 to 60, inclusive (because leap seconds)
- `tm_isdst` is a flag that informs us whether a date is considered to be in DST for the local time zone **INSERT ANGUISHED SCREAMING HERE**

The internets say: The Daylight Saving Time flag (tm_isdst) is:
 
- greater than zero if Daylight Saving Time is in effect,
- zero if Daylight Saving Time is not in effect, and 
- less than zero if the information is not available.

`clock` gives the processor time in CLOCKS_PER_SEC units per second

### Environment

Use `getenv` for checking if an env var _is set at all_ and `getenv_s` for _fetching the value_.

Use `setlocale` to set locale. There are "locale categories" which are, as usual, not granular enough.

Dear programmers; multi-lingual immigrants hate your guts. Yours sincerely, a multi-lingual immigrant
who uses a Polish programmer's (US-layout-based) keyboard, SI distance/weight units _except_ miles for
road distance/speed, 24-h time, and British spelling, numeric formats, and monetary units.

Aaaaanyway. Where were we? Oh yeah, locale categories.

- LC_COLLATE
- LC_CTYPE
- LC_MONETARY
- LC_NUMERIC
- LC_TIME
- LC_ALL

### Error prevention, error handling

- `exit` - breaks program flow and exits, executes exit handler set by `atexit`, cleans up
- `quick_exit` - alternative exit, alternative handler set by `at_quick_exit`, cleans up
- `_Exit` no handlers, but will close file handles etc
- `abort` doesn't even do cleanup

- `static_assert` - compile-time assertions
- `assert` - runtime assertions (turn them off by defining macro `NDEBUG`)

## Progress Review

So far, I've spent ~11.5h over the course of five days on reading, taking notes and solving some challenges.
This took me through 1/3 of the book, ~100 pages, presumably the easiest part.

This feels rather inefficient.

So far, the book has covered C concepts I encountered before, so I took notes of syntax
and edge cases. A lot of the time has been spent on challenges, internalising the typical (?)
C advice like "remember to initialise your arrays", "you can add an int to a pointer",
"this is how to debug your program".

Level 2 ("to write code at a professional level") is another ~100 pages, and then level 3
("discover as you go") the last 100.

I'm gonna try a different workflow:

1. skim level 2,
2. note down only which sections to re-read,
3. take notes from these sections,
4. solve one large challenge at the end of it.

I have also spent a non-insignificant amount of time on setting up the time tracking and programming
environment, but that's a one-time spend. (Except that the C/C++ plugin seems to be broken. So far
I have resisted switching to VS Code. We'll see.)

I'm starting at a coworking space tomorrow, which will hopefully increase time spent on the project
and minimise distractions.
