# Developer journal, 21 January 2020

Planned: Modern C, skim part 3; one more challenge

## IDE setup

AW YIS more plugins

- [IDEA Keybindings port for VS Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=k--kato.intellij-idea-keybindings)
- [Markdown preview, Github style](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bierner.github-markdown-preview)
- [Markdown extended](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=bierner.github-markdown-preview)

## Modern C, part 3 skim notes

### 15.3 (measuring performance)

I need to do a refresh on statistics at some point; added a relevant section
to README

- p. 210 time measurement can suppress optimization opportunities
- p. 211 after sampling multiple times, check relative standard deviation
- p. 211 skew
- p. 212 avoid impact of time measurement by spending a lot more time
    in the experiment
- `timespec_get`, `timespec.tv_sec` may be unsigned - careful when subtracting,
    `timespec.tv_nsec` known to be signed
- p. 214 collecting running statistics (rather than summing them up afterwards)

Attempted to compile this, turns out that on macOS `TIME_UTC` and `timespec_get`
are undefined. Googling some more, and:

> modern C compilers are pretty much a Linux thing. (...) If you ever want your
> C code to be portable, you pretty much want to stick with C89 features,
> as painful as that is.

> On Posix systems, like Linux and macOS, we can use the clock_gettime function
> to get an accurate time value

Gah. *tableflip* (Although it does explain why C websites look like they're
stuck in the previous era XD)

[Macros to distinguish the operating system](https://sourceforge.net/p/predef/wiki/OperatingSystems/)

### 16.2 (macro argument type checking)

Temporary object of type T: `((T){ 0 } = (X))`

> The compound literal `(T){ 0 }` first creates a temporary object of type T
> to which we then assign X. Again, a modern optimizing compiler should optimize
> away the use of the temporary object and only do the type checking for us

It can be used to check whether X is assignment-compatible to type T.

Example use: pointers must be cast to void* before printing. But macros are
text replacements. A cast can go wrong if X isn’t a pointer. You can therefore
use `((void*){ 0 } = (X))` to force the compiler to check whether X is a pointer.

### 16.6 (type-generic programming)

- this is a C11 feature (note: relevant standards, C99, C11, C18 aka C17 - the
    latter used by clang)
- `_Generic` keyword
    - similar to `switch` because has a `default` option
    - input: type of the result of a "controlling expression" built from macro arguments
    - maps from an _unqualified_ type (as if it were passed to a function)
        to an expression, eg function name or constant
    - used in conjunction with `#define` macro
    - good to use with `inline` functions
    - every mapped expression must be valid for all mapped types, not just its
        corresponding type
    - trick: add 0 to argument in order to cause type promotion and decrease
        the amount of types to handle

Example use:

```c
#define min(A, B)           \
_Generic((A)+(B),           \
    float: minf,            \
    long double: minl,      \
    default: min)((A), (B))
```
...I think I do need to read the rest of chapter 16, but not right now

### 18 (threads)

- `thrd_create`: start new thread
- `thrd_join`: await termination of thread
- `thrd_start_t`: type of function which is executed at the start of a thread
- thread memory sharing in C: "provide the same void pointer to all threads"
    and that's where you store state. _hyperventillating_

...TBC

### Various corners of C

#### restrict keyword

`restrict` guarantees that the pointer is the only one which points
to the object within the function.

Maybe a function arugment cannot be `restrict` because of type system
(ie. the function has to have a specific interface, see thread functions).
In that case, cover yourself by copying the argument value into a restricted
local variable, and then only using that variable.

#### volatile keyword

`volatile`: variable value could change unexpectedly. Compiler will not apply
optimizations to the variable. _System always reads the value of a volatile
variable from its memory, rather than caching it in a temporary register._
That means access is slower and more costly.

In practice used for:

- Memory-mapped peripheral registers
- Global variables modified by an interrupt service routine
- Global variables accessed by multiple tasks within a multi-threaded application

Syntax variations:

- Volatile integer: `volatile uint16_t x;`
- Pointer to a volatile unsigned 8-bit integer: `volatile uint8_t * p_reg;`
- Volatile pointers to non-volatile data `uint16_t * volatile p_x;`
- Volatile pointer to a volatile variable: `uint16_t volatile * volatile p_y;`

#### Static keyword, when applied to a function

A static function in C is a function that has a scope that is limited to its object file.

#### Are integers pointers?

> conversion from non-zero integers to pointers must be made explicit through a cast
