# Developer journal, 26-27 January 2020

Planned: select resources, prepare direction for implementing a compiler

I extended this to a two-day journal because I'm reading implementation steps
and I want to have all of them covered in the same file

## Resource selection

I saw a [thread on Twitter on compiler courses](https://twitter.com/lambda_calculus/status/1118906585294700544),
so now I have even more options and, to be honest, I'm completely overwhelmed
with the amount of resources and unsure how to make the most of it. My first
instinct would be to read a book or two, and _then_ make a plan, and _then_...
but I'm also trying to challenge myself by doing things in a different way.

The other bit is, I don't want to just follow a tutorial. Ideally, I'd like
to write something that hasn't been done before (yay hubris.)

So?

1. Non-academic world uses LLVM anyway
    1. it'd be reasonable to smash together bison, flex, and some code to generate
        an llvm frontend
    2. but actually I'm interested in the equivalent of what LLVM itself does
    3 so I can stop worrying about being original
2. Most of the courses mention Ghuloum's paper
3. Ghuloum's strategy is "look at assembly output from an existing compiler"
    1. so I need to find a language which has an existing compiler
    2. such as C and clang
    3. or... C and emscripten

## An Incremental Approach to Compiler Construction, notes

### Criticism of other approaches

Books about compilers divided in two categories: overly simplistic, and
overly detailed.

Not very complimentary about Wirth, writing for an imagined simplified
architecture.

In advanced books about compilers, the authors skip problems that are already
solved, and present working solutions. That's very polite of them. Author
disapproves, because this is not educational and the reader is not engaged,
losing overall view in details. In short: they're tedious and overlong.
Appel's book, by proximity, is presented as belonging to this category.

Other advanced books (Muchnick - Advanced Compiler Design and Implementation)
skip practical concerns, and present compilation theory only for languages best
suited to this approach.

### Selecting language being compiled, and language in which to write

Input language: a subset of Scheme (selected to demonstrate major
compiler-related issues).

Implementation language: Scheme (because it makes reading input easier,
and thus parser/lexer can be constructed later in the tutorial.)

Output language: assembly for Intel-x86.

### Implementation process

#### Write assembly (or not)

Apparently the assumption is that nobody knows assembly and nobody cares;
and further that learning assembly would be a distraction. Therefore let's write
a corresponding code in C (`scheme_entry` function), let gcc produce assembly,
which we can then yoink and have the compiler output it straight.

Later, there are entire chunks of assembly that are provided for demonstrative
copypasta purposes.

#### Test your code

Write a C driver that calls the compiled function, then checks that its
output is correct. I'm missing something here because I can't see how
it's linked together. I'm assuming the compiled code is preceded with
declaration of `scheme_entry`, followed by compiler-generated assembly,
and that is somehow linked to the driver code.

Luckily, author offers a test suite on his website. http://www.cs.indiana.edu/~aghuloum
Unluckily, the website is dead. Luckily, we have a Wayback Machine.
Unluckily, file not found (I don't know if this is because of the machine,
or author.) GAH.

    However, I could use approach from `nlsandler/write_a_c_compiler`
    and test program return value.

    In fact if I wanted to be lazy, I could re-use her input and output
    languages of choice (that is, C, and 32-bit assembly, although she
    warns people to use 64-bit instead)

    _Registers are different than those explained in Ghuloum's paper_


### Suggested implementation steps

A list of things to implement, with notes on what underlying mechanisms they
include.

1. Integers
    - return an integer from "main"
    - `%eax` register (return value)
    - set up a repeatable testing mechanism
2. Immediate Constants
    - introduces the concept of value type
    - values that fit into one word; especially values that do not involve
        extra wrappers (boolean, character, empty list)
    - encode type in value using lower bits
3. Unary Primitives
    - introduces more complicated operations on registers
    - `%esp` register (stack pointer)
    - single-argument built-in functions like `add1`, `dec1`, casts, predicates
    - not actually corresponding to `++` or `--` since these modify variable in place
    - but these could be applied to values: `!` and `~`, and casts
4. Binary Primitives
    - introduces the concept of a stack, to save intermediate values
    - binary primitives: `+`, `*`, `<`, `==` etc
5. Local Variables
    - introduces the concept of environment (variable name => stack offset)
    - variables are saved on stack
    - variables are "popped" from environment because (I assume) `emit-let` is
        recursive and passes extended environment to body execution
        (where it checks for `null?`)
6. Conditional Expressions
    - introduces comparison (compare condition to false), jumps, labels
7. Heap Allocation
    - introduces the concept of heap
    - introduces variable-length types (vector, string)
    - `%esi` register (heap pointer)
    - more object types
8. Procedure Calls
    - introduces procedure calls and parameter passing
    - assuming no global/external variables available
    - store an association between top-level labels and addresses
    - evaluate arguments to function, storing them at current top of stack+1
    - increment base stack pointer to top of stack
    - adjust base stack pointer to initial position; procedure result is
        now at top of stack
9. Closures
    - introduces saving values of closed-over variables
    - `%edi` register (closure pointer)
    - people complained this has no intermediate representation, but that's
        false: during this step it converts `lambda` form to `labels`, `code`,
        and `closure` forms
    - difficult to understand without seeing code and/or knowledge of Scheme
10. Tail Call Recursion
    - introduces overwriting the current frame (ie. return location, local vars
        and arguments) (better methods in section 4)
    - `jmp`, not `call` (TODO: check definitions in assembly?)
11. Complex Constants
    - quoted forms (code-as-data)
    - introduces object identity because scheme spec for quoting requires
        that the form always evaluates to the _same object_
    - solution 1: transform the AST! lift object construction to top of program
        (as "global vars" in a top-level let)
    - solution 2: assign a label to every complex constant (another
        transformation)
12. Assignment
    - cannot put assignable variables on stack because of closures
    - every assignable variable is now a single-element vector on heap
    - convert `set!` into `vector-set!` and so on
13. Extending the Syntax
    - introduces concept of compiler passes
    - new compiler pass: macro-expander
        - renames all variables to unique names (alpha-conversion)
        - "places explicit tags on all internal forms" (by which I guess this
            means the "type" binary flags on addresses?)
        - simplifies some forms into core forms, eg. I imagine `when` into `if`
14. Symbols, Libraries, and Separate Compilation
    - need to be able to provide a core function name as argument to map
    - could substitute it with a lambda (but: bloat)
    - could prefix user code with a large let with all primitives (but shit for debugging)
    - better: write libraries in separate files, compile those files, link to user code
    - new compiler forms suggested, `primitive-ref x` `primitive-set! x v`
15. Foreign Functions
    - introduces calling functions from C (interacting with the operating system)
    - `call` to a named procedure
    - "Application Binary Interface (ABI) guarantees that the callee would
        preserve the values of the `%edi`, `%esi`, `%ebp` and `%esp` registers"
        (Ref: System V Application Binary Interface, Intel 386 Architecture
        Processor Supplement Fourth Edition, 1997.)
    - when saving argument values on stack, need to remove the "type" binary flags
        which this code does using wrapper functions written in C
    - suggests implementing a wrapper to `write`
16. Error Checking and Safe Primitives
    - introduces the concept of an error handler and main sources of fatal errors:
        - attempting to call non-procedures
        - passing an incorrect number of arguments to a procedure
        - calling primitives with invalid arguments
    - implement an `error` error-reporting form using `write` and `exit`
    - runtime checks call this form
17. Variable-arity Procedures
    - relevant in the context of error checks for "do we have enough args"
    - for things like `+` which in Scheme can accept multiple values
    - convert extra arguments (from stack) into a list
18. Apply
    - reverse of previous step
    - copy an argument which is a list onto stack as many arguments
19. Output Ports
    - I think author means streams here?
    - struct: (ID, file name, file descriptor, string buf, next pos in buf, buf size)
    - buffer flushing, file open/close
20. Write and Display
    - implement `write` and `display` in Scheme, rather than with a C wrapper
21. Input Ports
    - struct: as output ports, but with an "unread" field (for `peek`)
22. Tokenizer
    - DFA
    - converts read strings into tokens (an object signifying the grammatical
        function of an element, plus its label/value if any)
23. Reader
    - recursive-descent parser
24. Interpreter

### Suggested followups

More features, with references to follow up (see paper):

- numerical calculation
- macros
- heap overflows
- stack overflows
- transform program into continuation passing style

Performance improvements:

- unnecessary re-naming of variables rather than adding values directly
- tail-call recursion: eliminate copying arguments by permanently allocating
    those that don't change
- implement safe primitives
- copy propagation of constants and immutable variables, constant-folding, strength-reduction
- register allocation
- inlining
- elimination of run time type checks
