# Developer journal, 10 January 2020

Planned: C refresher.

Book: "Modern C"

## Actually reviewing C and not going mad

> The innermost dimension of an array parameter to a function is lost.
> Array parameters behave as if the array is passed by reference.

(So ok, in practice we're passing pointers.)

> That is, a string like "hello" always has one more element than is visible, which contains the value 0, so here the array has length 6

it is known, but good reminder

```c/c++
char jay0[] = "jay";
char jay2[] = { 'j', 'a', 'y', 0, };
char jay3[4] = { 'j', 'a', 'y', };
```

Not all arrays of char are strings. These both cut off after the 'y' character and so are not 0-terminated.

```c/c++
char jay4[3] = { 'j', 'a', 'y', };
char jay5[3] = "jay";
```

`string.h` contains string-relevant functions, such as:

- for arrays of chars
    - `memcpy` copying a length of stuff from one string to another
    - `memcmp` comparing strings
    - `memchr` search string

_it would have been helpful to also mention there exists `memset` btw_

- for strings (requires the 0-terminator):
    - `strlen`
    - `strcpy` like memcpy but copies the whole source
    - `strcmp`
    - `strcoll`
    - `strchr`
    - `strspn` length of common prefix
    - `strcspn` length of divergent prefix

### static, const as used with arrays

`void swap_double(double a[static 2]) {`

Explanation from: https://stackoverflow.com/a/3430353

`void someFunction(char someArray[static 100])` tells the compiler that someArray is at least 100 elements long.
This can be used for optimizations. For example it also means that someArray is never NULL.

`void someFunction(char someArray[const])` declares someArray (not someArray's elements!) as const,
i.e. you can not write someArray=someOtherArray

### Pointers

Pointers: null, valid, or indeterminate (eg. uninitialised pointer is indeterminate). `NULL == false == 0`
Pointer to an empty string is not the same as a null pointer.

### Structures

A structure is a proper type in C. This is how to declare a structure,
and initialize a variable of this type, assigning values to structure members.

```c/c++
struct birdStruct {
    char const* jay;
    char const* magpie;
    char const* raven;
    char const* chough;
};
struct birdStruct const aName = {
    .chough = "Henry",
    .raven = "Lissy",
    .magpie = "Frau",
    .jay = "Joe",
};
// compare to array, which would use { [0] = "Henry" }

// you can also define nested structures:
struct person {
    char name [256];
    struct stardate {
        struct tm date;
        struct timespec precision;
    } bdate;
};
```

**Struct declaration scope can be global or block (function) bound** and if you define nested structs, they
are not "private" to their wrappers - they are visible in the same scope as the wrappers.

**struct parameters are passed by value**

`!=` and `==` comparisons don't work on structures.

### typedef keyword

`typedef` creates an _alias_ for an existing type

Variables have to use `struct` keyword along with the name of the struct as their type, because historical reasons.
If you want to make it easier for people, alias the struct with `typedef` like so (this is an idiom):

```c/c++
typedef struct birdStruct birdStruct;
struct birdStruct {
...
};
``` 

This is how to use typedef with arrays, incl. specifying array dimensions:

```c/c++
// A, B and C have the same type
typedef double vector[64];
typedef vector vecvec[16];
vecvec A;
typedef double matrix [16][64];
matrix B;
double C[16][64];
```
