# Developer journal, 8 January 2020

Planned: C refresher.

Book: "Modern C"

## Accountability

In Beeminder, add an IFTTT goal `coding-retreat`, committing to 60 minutes per day (minimum goal.)

In IFTTT, set up a Beeminder integration.

1. set event name to `coding-retreat`
2. set Beeminder goal name to `coding-retreat`
3. set datapoint value to `{{Value1}}` (this will come from a Qbserve event, see below)
4. set datapoint comment to `Source: Qbserve` (this is a human-readable comment)
5. go to [webhook settings](https://ifttt.com/maker_webhooks/settings), copy the URL
6. go to the copied URL, enter `coding-retreat` in the URL and `30` in value1, press Test
7. check Beeminder goal to see if the data came through (you can delete it later)

Set up the time tracking app: [Qbserve](https://qotoqot.com/qbserve/). I prefer Qbserve
because it stores all the data locally. If you didn't care about privacy, you could work with RescueTime,
and you wouldn't have to set up IFTTT.

1. In `Advanced > Containers`, set up a new container "Coding retreat" in category "Reference & Learning"
2. In `Advanced > Rules` set up some rules classifying time spent as "Coding retreat"
    1. if Window title contains "coding-retreat-2020"
    2. if Page URL contains "coding-retreat-2020"
    3. if Window title contains (book title being read currently)
3. In `Preferences > Notifications` set up an alert if more than 30 minutes have been spent over the last hour on "Reference & Learning"
4. On this alert, set up an event:
    1. set event name to `coding-retreat`
    2. set key1 to `value1` (all lower-case) and value to `30`
    3. set Webhook URL to the URL you copied from IFTTT including the event name
    4. set method to POST
    5. press "Test" and see if data came through (you can check it both in Beeminder and IFTTT)
    6. if it worked, press "Save"

The procedure is also described in a [post on Qbserve/IFTTT integration](https://qotoqot.com/qbserve/articles/integrations/).

## Environment setup

### Editor

IDE options:

- [CLion](https://www.jetbrains.com/clion/)
- [IntelliJ IDEA Community Edition](https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/download/) with a [C/C++ plugin](https://plugins.jetbrains.com/plugin/1373-c-c-)
    note the comments, the plugin needs some light editing before it will be installable
- [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/)

I prefer Jetbrains IDEs but they don't have a community edition of CLion, so have to make do with IDEA and plugin shenanigans.
If that doesn't work, I'm gonna have to get used to VS Code /shudder

## Follow the ~~white rabbit~~ book

### Compiler options

Available compilers:

`clang -std=c99 -Wall -o getting-started getting-started.c -lm`
`gcc -std=c99 -Wall -o getting-started getting-started.c -lm`

- `-W[level]`: which compilation warnings to display
    - `-Wall`: all warnings
    - `-Werror`: will force gcc to not produce an executable if there are errors (clang doesn't by default)
- `-o [somename]`: provide name for compiler output (executable)
- `-l[somename]`: link a library 
    - `-lm` link `libm.a` for math functions
- `-g` add debugging information

### Debugger commands

`lldb getting-started`

- `run` to run the process
- `breakpoint set -n [function-name]`
- `breakpoint set --file [file.c] --line [number]`
- `process continue` continue from the breakpoint; also `step`, `next`, `continue`
- `frame variable` - print all variables in scope, and their contents (as scalars)
- `frame variable [var name]` - scalar contents
- `parray [array length] [var name]` - array contents

### C features and standards

`size_t` - `_t` in the name. This naming convention is used by the C standard to remind you that the identifier refers to a type

> Each object or function must have exactly one definition.

So I'm guessing no function overriding...

#### False friends, curiosities

`for (size_t i = 0; i < 5; ++i) {` - the scope of `i` is inside the `for` loop only!

There exists both a `while() { ...}` and a `do { ... } while();` which is nice, but note the semicolon.

You can use `break` and `continue`.

Q: are there labels for `break` or `continue`, to allow breaking/continuing outer loops? 

A: no, but you can `goto` a label.

Sparsely populated array: default value 0, indexes in square brackets, can be out of order, can end with a comma.

Arrays initialized with curly brackets!

```c
double A[5] = {
    [0] = 9.0,                                         
    [1] = 2.9,
    [4] = 3.E+25,                                   
    [3] = .00007,                                   
};
```

Function with a return type but no arguments: `int main(void)`

0 is falsey, everything else is truthy.

Q: How about null?

A: Quoth the internets: `NULL` is essentially the zero address and is treated as such;
ANSI C guarantees that any null pointer will be equal to 0 in a comparison with an integer type.

`NULL` is, apparently, a macro, not a language keyword?

#### Types

Level 0

- size_t (in stddef.h)
- double
- signed (int)
- unsigned
- bool, _Bool (in stdbool.h)

Level 1

- ptrdiff_t (in stddef.h)
- char const*
- char
- void*

Level 2

- unsigned char*

Q: What does level mean?

Type conversion example: `strtod()`

#### DOs and DON'Ts

Don't reuse the same variable in multiple `for` loops. Logical.

Don't declare multiple variables in the same line (continued declarations)

Define variables as close to their first use as possible

Pointers:

- use array notation when known the argument can't be null, eg. `int argc, char* argv[argc+1]` instead of `int argc, char **argv`
- use function notation when known the argument can't be null, eg. `void handler(void)` instead of `void (*handler)(void)`

Code style: leave opening block bracket `{` in the same line as its preceding keyword, and closing `}` in a new line.

#### wat?

> We bind type modifiers and qualifiers to the left

`char const* const path_name` (internal screaming intensifies)
